---
title:  Comment Requirements
layout: default
filter:
  - erb
  - textile
---
h1. Comments

h2. Doxygen

p((. *Read Appendix F*

h3. Required comments

From the class text book, pages 44 - 45

Commenting required in each source code file:

1. Initial comment at the *top of each file* 

* File name (@file)
* Statement of purpose
* Author (@author)
* Date (@date)
* File version number (@version) -- optional

2. Comment for each *class* 

* Name of class and its header file (@class) -- optional
* Statement of purpose

3. Comment for each *method or function*

* Statement of purpose
* Description of each argument in the argument list (@param)
* Preconditions (@pre)
* Postconditions (@post)
* Exceptions thrown (@throw)
* Return value (@return)

4. Comments in the body of each function elaborating on important / difficult logic

h3. Running doxygen

See "doxygen example":http://people.eecs.ku.edu/~jvalland/files/comments/someClass.h

Create a new folder to hold this file, such as "doxygen_example".  Download this file ( right-click and then "Save As") to the new folder.  Open a Terminal window and navigate to this folder.  Run the following commands:

p((. @doxygen -g@

This will create a doxygen configuration file, called "Doxyfile".  Open this in a text editor and search for the line "GENERATE_LATEX".  When you find this configuration option, switch the default to "NO".  This will prevent the latex files from being generated.

p((. @doxygen Doxyfile@

This will create a new folder in your current directory with the name "html". Inside will be a series of html pages, as well as css files and images.  

Open the file "classSome.html" in Firefox to see the documentation generated.

In a real project, make sure to remove this folder *before* submitting the lab. 

