---
title:  Using Gedit
layout: default
filter:
  - erb
  - textile
---

h1. Gedit Help

h2. Configuration

If you open up the Preferences menu ("Edit" -> "Preferences"), you can turn on a number of enhancements.

I would suggest the following options turned on:

h3. View Tab

*Text Wrapping*

+ Enable text wrapping

+ Do not split words over two lines

*Line Numbers*

+ Display line numbers

*Current Line*

+ Highlight current line

*Bracket Matching*

+ Highlight matching bracket

h3. Editor Tab

*Tab width*

+ 3 or 4

*Automatic Indentation*

+ Enable automatic indentation

h2. Plugins

You can also install a number of gedit plugins to enhance its functionality.  Click on the *Plugins Tab* and Place a check-mark next to the following:

*External Tools*

*Indent Lines*

*Snippets*

h3. Snippets

The most immediately useful plugin is snippets.  This allows you to create templates of code you type often. Examples include for loops and include statements.

"Download Here":http://people.eecs.ku.edu/~jvalland/files/other/c++.xml Some C++ snippets.  (It is an .xml file so you will have to *right-click* and then *save link as*)

Now we need to move this file to the right location.

Open a terminal and execute the following command : 

@cd ./.gnome2/gedit/@

This will move you to the gedit directory.  Now check to see if there is a folder called snippets already there:

@ls@

If you see "snippets", thats fine skip this next step.  If not, create it:

@mkdir ./snippets@

Now we need to copy our c++.xml file to this location.  Because it is in a hidden folder (.gnome2) we will do it from the command line to make it easier.

If your c++.xml file is on your Desktop (in your desktop directory) execute the following:

@mv ~/Desktop/c++.xml ~/.gnome2/gedit/snippets/@

If your c++.xml file is in your home directory, you could do this:

@mv ~/c++.xml ~/.gnome2/gedit/snippets/@

Now close gedit if it is currently running and open it back up.

Under the "Tools" drop down menu, you should see an option to "Manage Snippets...".  Click on this and open the C++ section to see your snippets.

